# 41st EuroForth 2025

## Programme

### Forth standard meeting
Times are converted to your local timezone indicated by a blue background, if you have javascript enabled (no, this cannot be done server-side). \
Otherwise `UTC(+0)` will be displayed and you have to calculate the offset yourself.

#### Wednesday, 10th September 2025 UTC(+0)
- 12:30 Session 1
- 14:30 Coffee Break
- 15:00 Session 2
- 17:00 End of main sessions
- Workshops

#### Thursday, 11th September 2025 UTC(+0)
- 07:30 Session 3
- 09:00 Coffee Break
- 09:15 Session 4
- 11:00 Lunch
- 12:30 Session 5
- 14:30 Coffee Break
- 14:45 Session 6
- 17:00 End of main sessions
- Workshops

#### Friday, 12th September 2025 UTC(+0)
- 07:30 Session 7
- 09:00 Coffee Break
- 09:15 Session 8
- 11:00 Lunch


### EuroForth 2025 conference
**on air** ... these session are streamed live on [twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/4ther), recorded and shared on [youtube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_mpkwOO_1ILd66GUTNVPQg) for future generations to enjoy and to rewatch

<!--
#### Friday, 27th September UTC(+0)
 Workshops / Important night talks

#### Saturday, 28th September UTC(+0)
 Lunch
- 13:00 Excursion ToDo: Details
- 16:30 Formal Dinner
- 19:30 Workshops / Important night talks

#### Sunday, 29th September UTC(+0)
 Official end of EuroForth
- 12:30 Lunch
- 13:30 Beginning of Forth Day
  As quite a bunch of us are staying for extra nights, we will venture together into the city to see even more
-->

#### Friday, 12th September 2025 UTC(+0)
- 12:00 Session 1 **on air**
  - M. Anton Ertl: Code-Copying Compilation in Production --- An Experience Report   (45min)  
    A code-copying compiler implements a programming language by concatenating code snippets produced by a different compiler.  This technique has been used in Gforth since 2003, with code snippets generated by GCC.  We have solved various challenges: in particular, which code snippets can be copied and what to do about the others; and challenges posed by changes in compilers.  The performance of Gforth is similar to that of SwiftForth, a commercial system with a conventional compiler; the implementation effort is comparable to 1--2 targets for SwiftForth.
  - Nick Nelson: Forth 2025 (45min)  
    Some bold and radical changes to Forth will be proposed, in order to make Forth an attractive choice as a modern commercial language, while retaining its greatest strengths.
- 13:30 BioBreak
- 13:50 Session 2 **on air**
  - David Kühling: Logarithmic Number Systems (45min)  
    Many Forth systems, especially in the micro-controller/embedded domain, come with custom implementations of  a software-emulated floating point wordset based on a mantissa and exponent representation. Logarithmic number systems represent an alternative that is often overlooked, that can be beneficial in the context of embedded systems.
  - William Stoddart: Investigating the weak Goodstein Theorem. (45min)  
    The weak Goodstein theorem is a counter intuitive result which concerns numeric sequences which grow explosively but eventually converge to zero. Every term in these sequenes is calculated using a different number base, which may give Forth programmers a head start in comprehending them. The modest aim of this talk is to provide an intuitive understanding, or informal proof, of these surprising results. The strong Goodstein Theorem will be briefly mentioned.
- 15:20  Workshops / Important night talks

#### Saturday, 13th September 2025 UTC(+0)
- 07:30 Session 3 **on air**
  - Andrew Read: Forth VT100 (30min)  
    Using a remote terminal is a far more efficient way to control a remote telescope than hardware/software KVM.  Remote telemetry of information is enhanced with terminal graphics.  This is a research and development project into using VT100 escape sequences in a VFX Forth terminal
  - Jörg Völker: Fancy Forth (45min)  
    Forth detoxified. Inner workings of an symplified, application tailored umbilical implementation, fault tolerant and fun to use
- 08:45 BioBreak
- 09:05 Session 4 **on air**
  - Gerald Wodni: VFX 6 Alpha (45min)  
    After showing new features at past EuroForth conferences it is time to put things together
  - Ulrich Hoffmann: Blending Forth - mixing other Languages and Forth (45min)  
    The choice of a Forth System's implementation language of  has an impact of its capabilities. It can inherit algorithms and data structures from its implementation language and provide interactivity in return. The talk will take a closer look at the impact of this. Makeing educated use of this effect might lead to new kinds of Forth implementations.
- 10:35  Excursion TBD
- Workshops

#### Sunday, 14th September 2025 UTC(+0)
- 07:30 Session 5 **on air**
  - Bernd Paysan: Wayland in MINOS2 (40min)  
    
  - Stephen Pelc: VFX Forth for AA64 Linux (35min)  
    VFX Forth for AA64 (ARM64) is now available in a beta test release for 64 bit Linux. The paper considers the AA64 instruction set and how it is affected by and affects the VFX Forth tool chain, especially the cross compiler, disassembler, assembler and code generator. Some lessons are learned that will simplify future 64 bit implementations  of VFX Forth, in particular the kernel and the O/S interface layers.
- 08:45 BioBreak
- 09:00 Session 6 **on air**
  - Nick Nelson: Enumsment (15min)  
    Improvement to Enumeration
  - M. Anton Ertl:  What is a character?  UTF-8, Unicode, and the Xchar wordset (15min)  
    Unicode has the concepts of code unit (1 byte in UTF-8) and code point (1--4 bytes) in UTF-8.  It does not clearly define "character"; a glyph can consist of several code points.  UTF-8 works great with Forth-94: Use strings to represent glyphs (or sequences of glyphs).  Therefore the xchar words see little use, but they are there if you really want to deal with code points.
  - Ulrich Hoffmann: f83 in the browser (15min)  
    Impromptu Talk
  - Impromptu: Talks (40min)  
    Lightning & Impromptu Talks
- 10:25  End of EuroForth Conference
